[Music]
[Laughter]
Good evening. I'm Dr. Dr. Rich Besser,
chief health and medical editor at ABC
News. I want to welcome you to our
program, Cancer's Last Stand, the genome
solution. I think you're in for a real
treat tonight. We have a fantastic
panel. We're going to be talking about
the cancer genome program project. This
project was modeled after the human
genome project and it it takes on cancer
in a new way. The goal here is to
understand the genetics of cancer and by
doing so to hopefully unlock new
treatments, new approaches to
prevention. And the people we have
coming out here in a minute are just the
people to to guide us through that
through that journey. So I'll begin by
introducing them. Our first panelist is
Dr. Eric Lander. He was one of the
principal leaders of the human genome
project. He's pioneered the application
of genomics to the understanding of
human disease and today is president of
the Broad Institute in Cambridge and
co-chair of President Obama's Council of
of Adviserss on Science and Technology.
Welcome. Good to see you.
Our next panelist is Dr. Mary Claire
King. She's professor in the department
of medicine and the department of genome
sciences at the University of Washington
in Seattle. Through her groundbreaking
work, she was the first to prove breast
cancer is inherited in some families as
the result of mutations in the gene that
she named Broco
one. Welcome. Thank
you.
Our next panelist is Dr. Fumi Olade.
She's associate dean for global health
at the University of Chicago Medical
Center where her research focuses on
understanding familial forms of cancer.
One main interest of hers is the genetic
basis of breast cancer in young women of
African ancestry. Welcome. Thank
you. And our fourth panel is Dr. Sid
Mukerji. He's a cancer physician,
researcher, and professor at Columbia
University Medical Center. A former Road
Scholar, he's also winner of the 2011
Pulitzer Prize for General Non-fiction
for The Emperor of All Maladies, a
biography of cancer. Welcome.
Well, my job this evening is to keep the
conversation going. And if my experience
in the back is any indication, not going
to be a problem. Conversation going is
not going to be a problem. It may be a
bit of an arm wrestle here to uh to get
to the topics I want to cover. We're
going to be talking about a number of
different things. We're going to start
with a little discussion of where are we
now? What are we talking about when
we're talking about the the cancer
genome project. Then we're going to go
back in history and and and talk a
little bit about where we've come from
and what we can learn from from that
experience. Um then we're going to look
at at some of the global implications.
What does the the the genome project
potentially mean for approaching cancers
around the world? And then the last
section is is is the future. Where where
are we going? What does this open for
us? What does it look like moving
forward? So to set the stage, you know,
I'm I'm going to throw these out to a
participant and then it becomes
basically a
free-for-all. Uh but I'm going to throw
this to you, Eric, and and I want people
to to get an understanding. What is the
cancer genome project and how will
understanding the genomics of cancer
change change what we're doing? Sure.
Well, the big discovery in cancer, the
most important thing to know about
cancer is that it's caused by mutations
in genes. That became clear around 1980
or so. But the question is, what genes?
A couple of cancer-causing genes were
identified around 1980, but you really
couldn't go searching around all the
human DNA to find those genes. So, you
know, one of the first things you had to
do is get the entire sequence of the
human genome. And one of the first
reasons to get the sequence of the human
genome is so someday you could study
cancer. So a human genome project
started around 1990 went for about 13
years. Got a whole sequence of the human
genome cost a couple billion bucks to do
and it was just one person. But then in
the last seven eight years the
technology has gotten better and better
and better. So that the cost of doing
DNA sequencing has come down about a
hundred,000fold.
So it's suddenly possible to learn about
the DNA in many different cancers. So
the idea that began to occur to people
in the mid part of the last decade um
was that why don't we start sequencing
lots and lots of cancers and see what
the mutations are and start piling up a
list in a couple hundred breast cancers
which genes are mutated. Maybe which
genes are mutated in all the cancers but
which might be mutated in half of them
or in a third of them or 10% of them.
and begin to let the cancer tell you
what was important based on which genes
were frequently mutated. But not just
breast cancer, lung cancer and colon
cancer and pancreas cancer to make
thousands of samples for eventually
dozens and dozens of cancer types and
get a whole road map as to what's going
wrong in each cancer. Doesn't tell you
immediately that you can cure
everything. But when you think about it,
it's nuts to think that we could ever
try to cure cancer without fundamentally
understanding what's wrong. Mary Cla, I
I want to turn to you. You've been such
a pioneer in in the work around breast
cancer. How does understanding the
genetics of breast cancer um lead to to
further treatments and and what does it
mean in terms of treatment right now?
Right. Well, when Jim Watson had this
idea about having the entire human human
genome sequenced for one composite
person, the dream was that it would be
possible to translate quite quickly that
accomplishment into personalized genomic
medicine. And in this particular case,
it's happened. We can tell for women who
have inherited predisposition to breast
cancer, many of whom of course come from
families in which their mother had
breast cancer or their father's sister
had ovarian cancer. That is there's a
there's a a devastating clue in their
history. We can determine what the
mutations are that are responsible for
that predisposition and we can offer
options to those women to do something
about it. The options are not pretty.
The opt the pr the principal option is
that when a young woman finishes having
her family at 38 39 that she have a a
prophylactic salpingerectomy that is she
have her fallopian tubes and ovaries
removed which greatly reduces the risk
of ovarian cancer of course and also
greatly reduces the risk of breast
cancer because the indogenous estrogen
levels drop by taking out the ovaries of
course. So there there is prevention. It
is invasive, but it keeps women alive
who would otherwise die. And this is
10,000 breast cancer cases a year in the
states that we can prevent in this way.
When you look at at all of the women
with breast cancer, what percentage
would fall into this familial genetic
group? In in the states, if we evaluate
white women and black women, this has
not yet been done for Asian women, um,
using old methods. So this hasn't been
redone since we have new methods, but
with old methods, the estimate was about
5%. So the actual estimate is probably
closer to about 10%. So it's a small
fraction of all of breast cancer. It's
disproportionately young breast cancer,
of course, and it's a much larger
fraction of ovarian cancer actually. So
maybe I can chime in at this point. So
when Mary Clay King uh was looking to
find the breast cancer susceptibility
gene, I think I remember when I first
heard her talk. It took her almost 25
years finding families all over the
world trying to map it. I started when I
was eight. You
understand? Amazing.
And I remember when she said, "I've
localized the gene." And I said, how
could she be so sure that she had
localized it? But it took four years of,
you know, plotting to find
BRCA1. And then immediately as a a
medical oncologist and somebody
who treats breast cancer. I sat there
and I thought, this could actually be
what we need in oncology. Why should we
wait for people to get cancer when we
can in fact be proactive? If we knew
somebody had an alteration that allowed
them to get breast cancer at 30 instead
of 40, which is when you know the
general public go and get your mamogram
at 40, but what if you're going to get
breast cancer at 30? Could we detect
that? So, I remember going back home uh
as a medical oncologist and say, "Okay,
I'm going to start a cancer risk clinic
because we've got to translate this
finding from the laboratory to help
patients." And in a span of 15 years,
not only are doctors using the test to
identify people at risk, we actually now
have medications, we have drugs that
target this particular pathway for
ovarian cancer, for breast cancer. And
now we actually looking at that pathway
in other cancers. So even today we have
drugs that come out are a result of
understanding the genetics. So tell them
how it works. I mean these are smart
people. They'll get it.
The the beauty of finding a gene is that
that's just the beginning because then
you have to look at how the protein
works and then you have to figure out
drugs to block the pathway. And that's
what's exciting about figuring out what
all the genes are that are altered in
cancer. When I started in medical
oncology, we had
chemotherapy. And I would say that's
like shooting at cancer. You know, if
you miss it, then you're done, right? If
you hit the target, then the patient may
get better. But what if we could
actually starve cancer or find the right
target? That all the time when we
administer a drug, we're going to hit
the right target. That's what genomics
allows us to do. I want to pull Sid in
on this. You know, in your book, you
talk a lot about the war on cancer and
uh this this this overwhelming drive to
to win the war.
um does genomics does genetics help us
understand better the whole idea of who
the enemy is and allow us to answer that
question in in a different way. So where
are we in terms of that war? Well, you
know, one of the fundamental things to
realize is that I think there's a
recapitulation of history that's going
on. So if you look at the way that that
we understand the body, there's a kind
of cycle that begins with anatomy and
then goes into physiology and then
ultimately goes into treatment or
therapy. And this actually happened in
the medieval ages. You began with
anatomy usually with normal anatomy.
Then you go into from normal anatomy you
go to abnormal anatomy and similarly you
go from normal physiology to abnormal
physiology and then you go from those
you synthesize those things and make
treatments. This is what the surgeons
did in the 19th century. this is what um
you know the the medical therapists of
the of the 8th century were looking for
and to some extent you can really
imagine that we're doing the same thing
we're recapitulating that cycle from
anatomy so so in other words the human
genome project is the normal anatomy of
the human gene the human genome sorry
and the cancer genome project is the
abnormal anatomy uh you know you can say
that well the bones are broken here or
the you know the the brain is not
working here or some kind of analogy
like that and and and really now the
next step is to figure out so again
reminding us of the sort of cyclical
nature of this is to figure out what the
physiology is and that by that I mean we
know what the genes are the question is
what do the genes do um and once you
figure out what the genes do you can
then begin to make decisions about what
to do about them what to do and and and
and and mclair example is a wonderful
example because that's a real time
example during our own lives when in
fact we've gone literally from the
normal anatomy of the human breast cell
to the abnormal anatomy of the breast
cancer cell to a treatment that is
focused on that abnormal anatomy. So
it's it's it's it's wonderful that that
you know it's the future but in fact the
future is about the past.
Let's talk a little bit about about the
past and and some of the misconceptions
of the past. when when you look at where
we are now and how the approach to
cancer treatment is is moving forward,
um what can we learn from some of the
misconceptions of of the past to to
inform the the approaches of today? I
I'll take breast cancer as an example
since we're talking about breast cancer
and it's actually, you know, um someone
told me that if there's any controversy
in oncology, it will always go to breast
cancer. Everything that's like it'll
like like a homing bird will drive
itself. And actually there are
historical and social reasons for this.
Women's bodies have been uh have been
furrowed uh typically by uh you know by
the world of science for many many
years. Breast cancer is one example of
that. But just leaving aside that for a
second. So one of the great theories of
breast cancer advanced in the late 19th
century early 20th century is that uh
the reason that you couldn't get good
cures uh was that because surgeons
weren't cutting u enough um and the the
this idea was pioneered by many people
but most symptomatically uh William
Halstead the great uh pioneer of surgery
he really invented a a surgical training
program at Hopkins was one of the
world's great surgeons there's no doubt
about that but Halstead began to wonder
that the re whether the reason women
were not getting cured was because he
wasn't cutting aggressively enough. And
so what what eventually occurred is that
surgeons began to cut more and more
radically inventing the radical
mastctomy and the super radical
mastctomy to try again to to excavate
cancer and these actually their words to
excavate cancer out of the body. Um and
so that was one great mis misconception
which is cutting more does not equal
curing more often not in not in every
cancer but just again uh particular
breast cancer. And what's amazing about
it is that the chemotherapists almost a
century later would repeat exactly the
same same paradigm and they would think
to themselves well you know what maybe
the reason we're not curing breast
cancer in now in 1980 is because we
aren't giving enough chemotherapy and so
more chemotherapy must equal more cure.
And so again they escalated chemotherapy
until a point of time that you know
women were getting bone marrow
transplants to save them from the effect
of chemotherapy and it did not translate
into more lives saved. So I'm just
giving you example after example in
which these misconceptions amazingly
enough stay with us for so long. Fi as a
clinical oncologist how are you seeing
some of the results of genetic analysis
informing how you how you treat patients
so you're not hitting everyone with this
massive sledgehammer? You know, it's
it's actually amazing what's happened in
a short uh span of time. So, in the
early 90s, I remember a woman coming
into my clinic wanting to get treatment
for her two positive breast cancer. It
was one of the first, you know, drivers
of breast cancer that was identified as
an abnormal gene that was revved up. And
if you could actually target that gene,
you could get the most aggressive type
of breast cancer to stay in remission.
So we started a phase one clinical
trial. And this woman came from um uh
Salt Lake City looking to participate in
the study. And I remember when she could
not participate because she was not
eligible. She was very disappointed. And
I was thinking why would she be
disappointed? This is the most lethal
type of breast cancer. But she had read
that in fact if I got targeted therapy
even though this is advanced breast
cancer I might be cured. And so that
moment it became clear to me that it
wasn't really about more chemotherapy as
you said because it was also the time
when we were offering women bone marrow
transplant and I saw that even with the
transplant many women were doing well
but the women who got on those early
studies of targeted therapy even when
the cancer was
advanced some of them are still alive
today and that was really proof of
principle that when you know what's
wrong with the cancer cells when you
understand how the genetic wiring is and
when when you develop a targeted therapy
you're going to make significant
difference in outcomes. So we've learned
that in the last 15 years and now what
we need to do is scale up learn it about
all types of cancers. You know we also
used to do bone marrow transplant for
chronic myogynous leukemia and we found
a pill glyc right when you give it to a
patient in my time when I was training
the only way you could cure those
patients was the bone marrow transplant
now they take a pill a day and then they
let's let's now be careful about all
this right because we're talking about
the cases where it's working well right
so let's take a case that gets us a a
little more sober skin cancer. So in
sequencing skin cancers people so
melanomas melanoma I'll be technical if
Mary cla wants me to be technical but I
think we are in New York I think we
better call it melanoma
melanoma I formed by Mary some of us are
from New Jersey I'm from
Seattle for you for you it's skin cancer
melanoma so let's take melanoma if you
sequence melanomas what people found
some years ago was about 50% of the
melanomas contain mutation
in a particular gene called BFF. As
everybody up here
knows, people then went to try to make
an inhibitor against BFF and they
succeeded. They made a great inhibitor
against BFF. It went into clinical
trials. It's in clinical trials. It's
about to get approved because it has an
amazing effect on patients. It takes
patients with melanoma and it makes it
melt
away for eight months and then it comes
roaring back because the melanoma
develops another mutation that overcomes
that
drug. So if we're talking about a real
genetic war on cancer, then we're
talking about what I think used to be
called the Colin Powell doctrine, the
doctrine of overwhelming force. Right?
Colin Powell said, "You don't go to war
without overwhelming force." We better
know that most of these cancers, even in
gleevec, the application of Gleevec to
that blood cancer, resistance develops
because the tumor is not sitting there
passively. It's constantly mutating and
some of those mutations make it
resistance. So, we're need going to need
to have in our quiver another drug and
another drug. And truth is, we ought to
be using them right at the beginning in
combination. So we do a pinser movement
of all of these things until we really
have that whole toolkit and be able to
do the combination therapy sort of like
what they do with HIV and AIDS where
there's a three drug cocktail where the
virus can't escape. Until we have that
then the stories that we're able to tell
today which are a real glimpse of the
future are not going to be fully they're
not going to be relevant for all
patients yet. There's going to be time,
Eric. That that approach of of hitting
it hard, the the the POW approach,
doesn't that take us back in history to
the to the more is is better? Well, in a
way it does, but in a way it doesn't.
And that is the following, which is
that you can hit a tumor very hard, but
you have to spare the normal cells. And
that's the discrim. So, in other words,
it's not it's the the the concept is not
maximum therapy, it's discriminative
therapy. And there's a difference
between that. So if you can discriminate
between the normal and cancer and that
was the that was trouble. I mean there's
a lovely line in in a very moving
performance which which everyone should
see Anna Deir Smith's um unbelievable
new new work um called let me down easy
and this professor says you know
chemotherapy is like beating a dog with
a stick to get rid of its fleas. Um and
this is a man who's dying of cancer
himself. Um, so, so, so chem
chemotherapy is in some ways beating a
dog with a with a stick to get rid of
its fleas. But we hope that we're
getting to a point of time where you're
actually no longer taking a stick to the
dog, but using flea ointment. The
problem is that one flea ointment won't
work. You have to have six flea
ointments. Um, and that's the
difference, I think. Right. Right. And
so so that you know because I know there
as a medical oncologist I'm a card
carrying chemotherapy expert and uh
chemotherapy does work. Yeah it works
from it works and in fact the reason why
we were using more of it is remember
cancer used to be a death sentence right
if you heard you had cancer then you
know everybody was thinking you were
dead and then medical oncologists came
on and started using chemotherapy. In
fact, the first childhood leukemia, you
know, when children started getting
cured of their leukemia, it was because
doctors figured out how to use
chemotherapy and use it wisely. So, what
we're hoping would happen is that as we
understand how cancer cells are wired,
as we learn more by going down to the
fundamental basic science of why cancer
develops, then we can look at what we
need to combine. I think there will be
some instances where we have to use
chemotherapy and when we need to use it,
we just want to make sure we use it
wisely and and you can tell that from
the genotype of the cancer from the from
the genetic sequences that are arai in
that particular patient's cancer and in
the tumor at that moment as opposed to
the tumor from her primary three years
ago. I just so we're all on the same
page, I want I want to just take a side
question on on on what causes cancer. So
this week uh on on the news I I did a
story about the World Health
Organization warning about cell phones
possibly causing brain cancer. Another
report from the clinical cancer meetings
this weekend about a rise in throat
cancer from human papilloma virus. So we
have a a radiation risk we have a viral
risk. We How do you pull this all
together? And now we're talking tonight
about genomics. Um, I don't want to get
into do cell phones cause cancer, your
article and that was I I think was very
well done. Um, but how do you pull this
together and and and say how genomics
can help us understand all of these
different ways the environment plays
into cancer? I think Eric put it in a in
a very succinct and correct way at in
his opening remark and that is that all
cancer is the consequence of mutations
in genes. All cancer is the consequence
of aberrations in DNA and those can be
mediated by viruses if viruses work
their way into the genome. They can be
the consequence of exposure to mutagens
to to um agents that themselves cause
mutations such as radiation. They can be
the result of chance. They can be the
result of inheritance of a mutation from
a parent in which case of course all the
cells are affected rather than simply
the cancer cells. So there are a wide
variety of different causal mechanisms
but they converge on this one uh global
mechanism which is changes in the DNA
which is the conceptual basis of why the
cancer genome project works. So that
understanding those changes in the DNA
that end point is could lead to the new
treatments as long as we understand that
there are many changes in cancers that
are irrelevant to either the cause or
the progression of cancer. Um it's a
subtle but but critical point I think
and the others will will chime in on
this.
There the mutations that are critical
both in the cause of cancer and in its
progression have as one of their
consequences many of them um the opening
up of the floodgates for more mutations.
They are mutations which in and of
themselves destroy the capacity of the
cell to repair other mutations. So a
cell that had formerly when it was a
normal cell been completely able to
repair what went wrong or close to
completely now becomes completely
vulnerable and the least little thing
can cause a mutation which is one reason
we get resistance in cancer because they
are so vulnerable to additional
mutations. Go ahead. Put some numbers on
this. If you take a tumor and you
sequence its DNA and you compare it to
the DNA of that same person in their
normal cells, you might find about one
mutation every million letters. So about
3,000 mutations in the genome. Now, in
the in the part of the DNA that encodes
the proteins, that might be about 30 or
40 or 50 mutations that change proteins.
But there's a tremendous variance. Well,
of course, we we'll get to that. Some
some it's more, some it's less, but I'm
picking an average number here. But Mary
Cla will correctly point out that
there's some variation on average. But
the point is that most of those changes
are random changes that aren't causing
the cancer. So if I look at one person's
tumor, most of those changes aren't
informative. But if I look at two people
and three people and 10 people and a
thousand people, then I can begin to see
that this gene is getting hit much more
often than by chance. Whereas this is
just sort of chance noise. So a cancer
genome project needs much more than one
patient. It needs many patients, but
cancer is no rare disease. It's totally
possible to look at enough patients that
you can sift out that noise and see the
signal. But there won't necessarily
Sorry, tell us about the cost now. So
what's the cost of a of a single exo or
a single genome these? So sequencing the
whole genome used to cost a few billion
bucks, making it not really affordable
for most people. um you know it then
came down to a few million bucks to a
few hundred thousand bucks to somewhere
between you know some let's call it
$10,000 today um per per genome uh if
you just want to sequence the genes the
exo you know a few thousand dollars can
do it and it's still coming down so I
think it'll it'll settle out in a few
thousand range and so if we wanted to
look at a thousand cancers at several
thousand dollar each it's a few million,
right? Which is a tiny number compared
to what we spend on each of those
cancers. Exactly. I mean, we sequenced
u several genomes for pre-lukemia and I
think it came to $1,500 a sample. Just
the gene the genome. Just the gene.
Yeah. $1,500 a sample. Um I can tell you
a single day's cost a single day's
hospitalization cost of a complication
from cytotoxic chemotherapy runs into on
the order of five to 10 times that
amount. So if you can learn something
through doing sequencing to avoid that
that consequence as I said one a single
day's hospitalization of a complication
of chemotherapy is runs five to 10 times
can run between five to 10 times uh that
amount with everything involved. So
we've got to accelerate this because
it's still moving at a snail's pace
compared to where are we now in terms of
that? Is this all aspirational or or no?
So so this idea of a cancer genome part
project started as a pilot project about
four or five years ago. A few cancers,
three cancers were done for about a
hundred samples each and then it moved
into full gear about a year and a half
ago and there have now been oh I don't
know a couple thousand samples done
across multiple cancer types but
compared to what we need which is going
to be a couple hundred thousand samples
uh we're still way below what we ought
to do and the question is why not knock
this off the next five years we could
just do the whole thing in the next five
years, lay out that roadmap and then get
serious about the next stage that's it
talks about the physiology and right now
there isn't yet the funding to do it.
Folks are, you know, ringing their hands
saying, well, we don't have the money to
invest in biomedical research and we
should cut the budget of the NIH. Well,
yeah, tell us about the numbers. I mean,
I I'm I'm very keen. I mean, I, you
know, I' I've written about these
numbers myself. These numbers are very
instructive actually. So the NCI budget,
the total NC5 billion billion dollars a
year. Um the amount of money that we
spent on the war in Afghanistan numbers,
I'm going to I'm going to move us away
from the political right now.
Moderator's prerogative. Yeah. Yeah.
Jump right in here. Actually, I mean,
your point is, but I want to I want to
move us I have a question for you.
I told you it was going to be arm
wrestling up here. Um Yes. We're on our
good behavior. The the human
be warned. The human genome project.
Yes. Last year in a panel here, we were
talking about, you know, getting a
100,000 people and sequencing their
genomes. Yep. Um do you think that
there's going to be more payoff in terms
of treatment of cancer, understanding
cancer through sequencing human genomes
or cancer genomes? Both. Why are we
choosing? Well, I mean, one of resources
are finite for one. Well, actually, it
turns out to sequence a cancer genome,
you have to sequence the tumor and the
normal DNA anyway and the normal. So,
you get it anyway, so don't worry about
it. I mean, there there's there's
there's some concern that the promise of
the human genome project hasn't paid off
as quickly as as people had had hoped.
So you mean as
say reporters had said to the public
that they were going to see cures in the
next five years or as as scientists had
had predicted the scientists were
actually if you go back care go back
we're actually remarkably careful
because I remember getting interviewed
around the time of the human genome
project and saying look for big impacts
about three decades from now when we
look at the impact of the germ theory of
disease
how microorganisms cause infectious
disease. That impact played out over 60
years from a basic understanding to
early crummy antibiotics to better
antibiotics to cheap penicellin to
people not dying routinely of infectious
disease. If we think about what it takes
to make a drug, it takes a decade after
you know exactly what you're doing, what
your target is. It was a pipe dream for
anybody to think that a decade after the
human genome project, we'd all be
popping drugs that had come out of the
human genome project. The test is look
at the pipelines of pharmaceutical
companies right now. Almost everything
in the pipelines, anything interesting
in the pipelines of pharmaceutical
companies have been touched by or shaped
by or critically dependent on that
genetic knowledge. The thing we've got
to be careful about in the conversation
between scientists and the general
public is not overpromising with respect
to timeline. The ultimate impact is
huge, but you can't compress this
timeline. Well, that's the that's the
question I really want to h ask you
about the the cancer genome project.
Learning from that experience you what
timeline should be pe people be thinking
about pay off from looking looking at at
my kids
I think you know so when we started
talking about the genome project right
there was a misconception there's going
to be one genome right but there are th
many genomes as there are people here so
the diversity of the
genome makes it challenging
and until we have thousands of genomes
sequenced, we wouldn't know how genes
actually work in the context of the
environment, lifestyle. I mean, we've I
know this was supposed to be the cancer
genome, but the cancer genome doesn't
become the cancer genome without your
lifestyle, how you were born, the food
you ate, the environmental influences
that happen to you all through life. You
were asking about what causes cancer. We
know that as the population is aging,
right? There's coupling of cancer with
aging. So developing countries have more
cancers because people are living
longer. The projection is that we're
going to have more cancer diagnosis. And
that's why oncologists are trying to
say, let's figure out a way for people
to live with cancer. Instead of, you
know, fighting a war against cancer,
maybe we can turn cancer into a chronic
condition that you take a pill for
because we identify the genome and we
understand genetic variations. Now,
we're very cautious how we use drugs
because we know that even side effects
differ based on genetic constitution,
right? We know efficacy of drugs varies
based on your genetic constit. So that's
already changing the way oncologist
think the way we think about cancer
changes it today.
Today you know 10 years ago we thought
breast cancer was one disease now we
know breast cancer is as many disease as
everyone who's sitting here right
because we have the genomic tools to
actually probe everybody's cancer. And
now when we're talking about
personalized therapy, when somebody
comes to me and wanting to know about
their breast cancer, the first thing I
say is if you have a family history,
this is not your mother's breast cancer
because you're living in a generation
that's not your mother's. So we need to
think about how why you got breast
cancer, what are your genes, what is the
lifestyle, what drugs we use. And so
it's already changed the way we think
about cancer. So I think the cancer
genome project will get us more precise
estimates, look at different pathways,
look at drugs that we should be putting
together. But already it's taught us
that we shouldn't think about cancer as
one disease. Looking looking back
historically, I I want to talk about
your tremendous discovery and and and
that that process. You when you were
working on on breast cancer, there were
people who said that you were misguided.
uh that that the approach to to breast
cancer wasn't the way people should go.
I I I' I'd love for you to talk about
that and and that experience.
I think one of the great advantages of
having been a young woman in science at
the moment that I was and beginning in
the in the 70s when I had my own lab is
that there were absolutely no
expectations.
Yeah.
It didn't matter what I
did. It was just fine. And but it
coupled with the absolute lack of
expectation and therefore essentially no
scrutiny was a willingness particularly
of physicians to help. So when I went
for example to Dr. Bernie Fischer, one
of the great breast surgeons, and I
said, I think that if we think of human
evolution in uh the scale of two
generations as opposed to 5 million
years, I think we can
identify the the changes that have
occurred in the in the last few
generations of a family that lead to
susceptibility in that family. and he
said, "Jane Smith, you know, Barbara
Olsen." And he started telling me about
patients and he put me in contact with
patients. He put me in contact with his
colleagues who put me in contact with
other patients. The the oncologists got
it. They understood that there was
something about some families that was
distinctive and in part um it was
directly because of their experience. In
part it was their intuition. Um, in part
it was because this had been written by
Paul Broka in you know in in France in
the 1860s. This had written been written
by the ancient Greek physicians. This
was not news. And by working with those
families albeit with I mean truly
primitive tools that you know the high
school students that we were talking to
this morning they just cackled. You're
sitting there looking at one base pair
at a time in your sequence. Literally
one base pair at a time and writing it
down. you know, each one writing it
down. Magic markers. Exactly. Right.
Right. This is this is prefact, you
know. Um, but it builds up. And of
course, every time there's a
technological advance anywhere in the
field, one grabs it, one makes it one's
own, one becomes a a rapid consumer of
that. So, I think the most radical thing
that's changed is the level of
acceptance of the concept that cancer is
genetic. Um when I said that um when I
was 28 29 years old and first starting
to work on this um people smiled except
for these except for these basically
these physicians who were old enough to
be my dad. I mean they yeah they were
fabulous. They were f I could not have
done it without them. um and the the um
the alliance between physicians and
scientists and now some people who
indeed are both uh has been critical to
this whole process. And I think one of
the uh challenges you faced because I
you know as an oncologist we were
excited to think about a way to predict
who was going to get cancer because we
saw people die from cancer and we wanted
to prevent that. But there were pure
geneticists who thought because of the
ethical, legal, and social stigma
associated with genetic testing and
being identified as having a family
history of cancer that we might cause
more harm than good, right? And so it
was important as we were really thinking
about how we diffuse that knowledge in
the clinic that we could be humble.
Because imagine what you could do if you
told a young woman that they had a
genetic change in their DNA that maybe
was going to cause breast cancer and
they did radical mastctomy and then you
learned better that in fact that change
was just a normal variation. Damn well
better not make that mistake. You would
not dare not make you would have caused
more damage. We did not make those
mistakes because we partially because
there was this very close alliance of
physicians, geneticists, genetic
counselors were were an integral part of
this who were constantly pushing both
for the knowledge to be out there and
for the correct knowledge to be out
there and presented in a way the patient
could understand and patient the patient
advocates. Yeah. So you talk about you
know different camps and people in
disbelief about the genetic approach. In
your book, you talk about all of these
groups that that don't talk to each
other who who who are going in different
in different ways. I mean, for me,
what's what's your sense now? Is the
research community and the clinical
community is it unified in terms of the
way forward? Well, well, you know,
inshah,
you know, one of the things that I've
learned in my career, it's, you know,
women are really, really smart.
And anytime you bring a little bit of
estrogen into a room, you get people
wanting to talk and collaborate. And one
of the things that I think really
happened was as more and more women
survived breast cancer. And I remember
the march on Washington, you know, when
we thought there was a breast cancer
epidemic and those women and you know,
you know, so many cancer advocates now
as more people are surviving cancer.
Those patient advocates are actually
making us talk to one another because
they're saying you cannot be in your
silos any longer. We need help right
now. So I think you know there's hope
but of course the way you know science
is rewarded in this country there's
competition you know and I I remember
when we used to go to Europe to to work
with our colleagues and collaborate and
the European breast cancer linkage
consortium everybody collaborated the
government gave them money and they all
put their families in one spot and
everybody worked together but here
everyone still had their mom and pop
laboratory that you had to fund. fund
and so there was no incentive to
collaborate but I think now that we
embraced team science you know the human
genome project was a lot of people
working together collaboratively the
cancer genome project is about
collaboration and now doctors real
doctors are actually now talking to the
scientist it used to be that we all
lived in separate walls so s what what
are you seeing are you seeing a similar
kind of picture yeah although I I have
to sound one small ranker surrounded all
of this which is that um you know
sometimes these collaborations don't
work very well um and um I'm I don't
know where I think there's a kind of I
think again there's a kind of
discrimination that's needed uh in terms
of figuring out what how to collaborate
um I think in some
ways in the end because we're human
beings innovations happen because of
innovators um Mary Cla King is an
innovator uh you you you need to go and
talk to Bernie Fischer and say, "I'm
going to be the person who picks up all
your patients." Um, and it's not going
to be my team. That's not the way a girl
does it. Yeah,
exactly. Bernie Fischer would never have
helped me out if I'd done that.
You know, Bernie Fisher,
I said I mean, I said what I felt, which
is, I think this might work. Let me try
this out on you. What do you think?
that it wasn't guy I mean it was just
the way I I think you make a very good
point that collaboration is clearly
critical um we none of us would be here
or be working were were it not for the
public's willingness to fund us
collaboratively through the NIH and
through the private foundations but but
basically science progresses because of
individual people having ideas that they
are prepared to pursue for a very long
time very doggedly and they can insp
inspire their students and their posttos
to come along with them and then we from
those small families we make large
kindreds. That's romantic but only half
the story, right? Science does progress
because of individuals who, you know,
have this individual drive, but unless
they have the tools to be able to do it,
fair enough. They can't peract. So the
thing is there's this balance, this
ecosystem between the smart young
individual following a dream and an
overall enterprise that's creating the
tools that let people have the power to
follow their dreams. But the individual
has to have enough autonomy to be able
to do that. That's the delicate balance
because if you go all the way to this
side of this is going to be a you know
an overall entity in or the Borg the
Borg is going to absorb you in the
common the broad no no be nice so that
you know you're going to get absorbed in
this thing and and it's going to be a
group thing that's terrible but on the
other hand if everybody because we've
seen it so often is off trying to do it
on their own in their lab and we're not
working together to create the tools the
infrastructure to let you go a hundred
times times faster, you also can't make
progress. And the delicate thing is how
to get both of those things right. When
we talk about big science and physics,
it's this massive accelerator and
everybody working and going for one one
experiment. When we talk about
collaborative science and biology, we're
talking about your experiment, your
experiment, your experiment, my
experiment, but let's work together to
get the tools we all need. I want to I
want to use that as a jump off to to
actually shift gears a little to the to
the global experience. When we talk
about collaboration w within the US
between laboratories um so much of the
work that is being done here and so much
of so many of the lessons that we've
learned um never make it to to the
developing world. And I I want to ask
you for you've done so much work uh on
looking at cancer around the world. what
what is the potential payoff from
genomics uh for for understanding racial
differences in in breast cancer and
other cancers and and addressing cancer
issues globally? We actually don't have
to go outside of this country to see the
global uh citizens that are in New York.
And uh so when we uh you know started
working in breast cancer families, you
know, we had families on the south side
of Chicago that no one had ever
even thought about them as participating
in research because they're underserved
and minority. And so we started studying
BRCA1 in African-American families. And
the more we studied African-American
families, the more we realized that in
fact BRC1 is not, you know, only for
women of European ancestry. You know,
when you ask Mary CLA, how many what's
the proportion of women with breast
cancer who have uh BRC 1 and two
mutation? We did a uh some work in
Nigeria and clearly 11% of young women
who were walking into a hospital
diagnosed with breast cancer had BRC 1
and two mutation. 11%
11%. So much twice as many as the 5%
estimates that we talk about here. It's
probably twice that when we get all the
genes right and then when we look at all
the genes. So what we know is that when
you have young onset breast cancer,
there's going to be an enrichment for
genetics. That's why I'm going around
the world saying we have to leapfrog,
right? We can't wait 40 years for
developing countries to catch up on
genomics and genetics research. you
know, Mexico now has a genome uh uh
project because they know that they're
not going to be able to take care of
their citizens without understanding and
benefiting from the genomic revolution.
And that's what really every country
needs to do because we realize that this
is the the truth. 90% of scientific
discoveries right stays in the north you
know western Europe and northern
countries right 10% of uh the people who
need drugs live in the north right the
rest of the global south right Asian you
know Latin America billions of people
who need drugs who need to diseases
studied aren't getting studied because
we're so focused on selling everything
to 10% of the world. So I think if we
really stand in solidarity and we look
at our genome as the genome of the
entire world, right? Then the genome
science has to really benefit everybody.
That's when you're thinking about social
justice equity and the benefit of genome
science should be for all. That said,
you don't need to have the genome
project to tell people not to smoke. Uh
so you know there is
there you don't need the human genome
project to prevent many many many
preventable cancers around the world.
The global burden of cancer can be
reduced without the human genome
project. You know a question on that. If
you look at at the US foreign aid budget
around health it's focused on infectious
diseases. It's focused on maternal child
health. Um we were talking earlier the
the human papilloma virus vaccine which
we give here to to young girls and and
to some boys when the burden of cervical
cancer is in the developing world. Um
should there be a shift in the way the
the US approaches its its global health?
Should there be as people are living
longer should should there be more
efforts in that direction? Let me give
you a very nice example. So in when um
Hodkins lymphoma this is a type of
cancer
uh we used to treat it in this country
with chemotherapy and radiation and then
the national cancer institute decided to
go to Uganda and do an experiment where
they did not have radiation therapy but
they could use chemotherapy and they
said okay can we cure Hodkins lymphoma
by using chemotherapy and they and there
was a wonderful ful pathologist uh
Buckets who described fascinating cases
of lymphoma in fact did strong work in
Africa. Do you know that by that
experiment showing that you can cure
lymphoma with chemotherapy we brought it
back to the US and now you can cure
lymphoma with chemotherapy. We would
never have known that if we hadn't gone
globally to do a simple question in a
resource poor setting. So I think that
now that we talk about H1N1 when we talk
about efficacy of vaccines when you were
talking about getting uh a vaccine at 40
cents a numoka vaccine can you imagine
if we all got vaccines for 40 cents in
this country our health care cost will
go down as well right why couldn't that
experiment be done in the United States
the experiment yeah this is a
interesting because we always think more
is better because we knew the answer. We
knew that you needed chemotherapy and
radiation and it would be unethical to
try the chemotherapy alone because we'd
be depriving the patient of that which
we knew was good. Which really gets to
the heart of an awful lot of the trials
that are going to have to be done. It
gets harder and harder to do clinical
trials when we think we have a standard
of care. And so it's a, you know, you
think about this cancer genome project
that's going to be producing hundreds
and hundreds of targets and hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of new drugs that
are gonna have to be tried in all sorts
of combinations. One of the greatest
worries I have is how we're going to get
all the clinical trials, frankly, all
the companies funded to be able to do
this and the clinical trials to do this.
the science I'm pretty sure will come
through but the ability to deliver and
it's going to take the whole globe to do
it. I I want to follow up on that in a
particular way and that is that the way
that drugs are marketed in this country
it's very difficult for a company to
develop uh over long term and
successfully market a drug that's
directed at only 2% of the cancers
because because there's no profit in it.
I mean you you cured the cancer. You can
actually make a good profit on something
that cures. Then then that message needs
to be given to the pharmaceutical
companies in a way that they come back
to us with it. I'm not sure that that I
think some of them know that. I think
they've learned it. So take a take a
good example, a drug that was being
targeted against lung cancer and we did
the study here and we it failed. The
drug failed. They did the study in Japan
and it worked beautifully. Yes. Right?
And they went back and said, "Why did it
work beautifully in Japan? I didn't work
here." Well, it turns out that in fact
the drug works when you have a target
when you have a mutation in EGFR. And it
was because that mutation was specific
to the lung cancer that was in Japan. So
I think all of the drug pharmaceutical
companies have learned from that one.
I'm going to note for that particular
example because I know it well. It
wasn't actually the company that went
and did the genetic study. The company
resisted the genetic study. It was a
bunch of my colleagues in Boston who did
this study because they the company at
that point and this was a particular
most of the companies I think know
better thought oh we don't want to know
about these genetic things because it'll
cut up the market that has changed
though I think that's what fum saying is
that really has changed but the time of
that about seven eight years ago people
were still thinking we don't want to
know how to cut up our market now I
think people are saying we want to know
how to target the most efficacious agent
to the right patient because that's good
medicine and will turn out to be good
business. But that means that we should
for every clinical trial be obtaining
the genotypes of the tumor and of the
patient and that's and that is still not
routinely being done. This this leads
to not routine. My next question u I
want to shift towards towards future
look and and this is a good segue into
that. There's there's a a presentation
going on at the clinical cancer meetings
this weekend that talks about instead of
looking at cancer by the organ that's
involved. This is breast cancer. This is
lung cancer. This is colon cancer.
Classifying cancers by the mutations by
by the genetics. Is is that Eric where
where we're headed? Of course. The idea
that the relevant thing is what tissue
we're talking about, whether it's a
breast or a prostate or a lung, that's
not what we're talking about. We're
talking about of the circuits in the
cell. You think about a cell has
circuitry, different kinds of pathways
for sending signals. You want to know
what's broken. So this melanoma, the
skins, skin cancer I was talking about
before, there's a mutation in a gene
called BFF melanoma. Well, golly, that
mutation also occurs in a brain cancer,
in a blood cancer, and in some other
cancers. It may be more sensible to
think about cancers that have a mutation
and therefore a vulnerability in that
pathway and then other pathways. So, on
and on, we're going to be So, you could
say, "Oh, it's horrible. We got all
these anatomical types and then we're
going to subdivide them and subdivide
them." But at the same time, we're
unifying them because we're seeing that
there's a finite number of relevant
pathways. We don't know how many yet,
but it's going to be a limited number.
Maybe it'll be a hundred pathways that
really matter. And as we begin to
understand when a cell has mutation in
this pathway that lets it be a cancer,
what are the Achilles heels it acquires
by having that mutation? And we're going
to begin to make a chart on the wall of
pathway number 72 gives rise to these
Achilles heels. There are drugs for it.
And I think if you want to think about
the future, there will come a point when
patient comes in, sequence the cancer,
and you're going to look up and say,
"Aha, following three pathways seem to
be used in this cancer. We know agents
that have a good therapeutic window here
that are very effective, specific
against the cancer, and pretty harmless
against normal cells. We're going to
know how to combine them. Now, what I've
got to be careful about is to say that's
not happening next quarter and it's not
happening next five years. It is, if we
play our cards right, and we're willing
to invest happening for our children by
the time they might need them as adults.
Start to happen. It'll start to happen.
No, no, look, it'll happen. You'll see
you'll see bits of it. It'll get better
and better and better. But I think we
have to be totally straight about saying
that the full return on this picture
what everybody thinks is what they the
end state that cancer becomes a chronic
treatable condition. Don't start
measuring that in the couple year thing.
This is a long march to get there but it
is a great goal to get there. It is like
curing infectious disease has been in
the first world and we have to stay that
course and we're doing it for our
children. In the long run it isn't going
to help me as much. It might by by
chance do it, but it isn't going to help
me as much as our kids. And if we have
to go to Congress and say, "We're
investing for our children, and it's not
coming during your re-election. It's not
even coming during your congressional
term." All right. I don't think there's
any shame in saying that for our
children, we'll be there. Sid, what what
do you what do you think on that? Are we
moving away from organ organ cancer
towards genetic? I I think I think that
there'll be a move in that direction but
I think as I said before if you want to
recapitulate the cycle I think we'll
have to move up again which is that it
turn it'll probably turn out that once
you've figured out this genetic anatomy
then there will be differences in the
genetic anatomy in the context. So in
other words, the genome is just the
beginning. People often say, well, you
know, is genome the end all? Of course
not. You know, the genome is a beginning
of a discovery process and then after
that, you know, we have to I think we'll
build up again out of the genome. And so
that in fact, it might turn out that the
metabolism of a drug in the lung might
be very different from the metabolism of
a drug in the brain. We know that
already. Some drugs don't get into the
brain. So you might have a big BFF
mutation sitting in your brain, but you
know, the drug that you get ain't going
to help because your drug is not going
to get in there. So you'll have to find
a different way to do this. So obviously
there'll be levels of complexity that
come beyond beyond this. But the but the
key thing to remember I think there are
two points. The key thing to remember is
cancers seem as if they can grow and
overwhelm the body. But cancer is a
vulnerable cell. Every cancer is a
vulnerable cell. It has vulnerability.
And that's the point. The point that's
being revealed by the genome I think is
that however you compute it there is a
vulner cancers are are cancers are weak.
They are weak because they are
vulnerable. They have disrupted pathways
that allow other cells to grow and
because of that weakness they are
fundamentally vulnerable. That's one
point. The second point is that to
exploit the vulnerability we of course
need the genome but then we need to find
treatments or prevention mechanisms to
exploit that vulnerability. Now think
for a second why a drug ever exists. Why
is it in isn't it it's quite miraculous
I think that a drug like aspirin exists.
Why is it that a single molecule could
go into your body and where you have
hundreds of thousands of molecules and
attack only turn off only 15 switches in
and and leave the 400 million switches
untouched. I mean isn't that an
unbelievable unbelievable idea and an
unbelievably historical idea but it does
exist such such things exist and that's
the real challenge. Will there be I mean
once the anatomy is all laid out will
there be such a chemical in the universe
will you discover it such a chemical in
the universe that will only turn off BF
and leave everything else untouched I
mean it's a it's it's an amazing thing
that such a chemical even exists give a
concrete example I mean what I'd love
for you to do is is to walk us through
that process from when you understand
the genetics what does it take to get
from there to right let me give the
example of BRCA cancer
And I do think of them that way. Um, and
they include all the cancers that are
the consequence of inherited plus tissue
specific mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 or
any of the other members of their
complex. There are and these cancers are
u certainly breast and ovary and to some
extent pancreas and to some extent
prostate. So they are all they are all
steroid enhanced cancers.
We know from genomics work that the
genes that are involved in these cancers
BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB B2, check 2, they're
and their sister genes are all members
of the same pathway, the same DNA repair
pathway. And when one of these genes
goes bad as a consequence of both an
inherited and a somatic mutation or as
the consequence of several mutations,
all of them in the same cell lineage
without anything being inherited, DNA
repair is abregated in that cell lineage
and a cancer is allowed to develop with
all of this additional mutational events
that we've heard about, some of which
drive the cancer to the next step. So
some some other scientists, no one on
this no one on this panel alas, had the
really very good idea of in the cancer
cells exploiting the fact that DNA
repair was already largely abregated and
killing off the rest of it. There is a
parallel pathway called the PARP pathway
that does not overlap with the BRCA
pathway. And it became clear to these
investigators that if they gave to a
patient who had um let us say an ovarian
cancer that had two mutations or more in
the BRCA pathway, if they gave a drug
that inhibited the PAR
pathway, those cells died off. It
directly targeted it exploited the
vulnerability of those cells and the
patient herself remained fine because
the rest of her cells still had one copy
of normal BRCA doing its normal job. And
this works very well and there are
trials underway and and this is doing
very well. The challenge, as both Sid
and Eric have said, is that after seven,
eight years, the cancer
returns. And if you fully sequence that
returned cancer, you find something
absolutely
astonishing. Those recurrent cancers
have in their original BRCA sequence
mutations which have
undone the original mutation.
Now what's the chance of
that? Why does that happen? It happens
because when we hit cells with
chemotherapy or with radiation, we are
creating still more mutations and they
have lost their capacity to repair. So
they build up an enormous number of
mutations, some tiny fraction of which
are in the genes that went arry in the
first place and an even smaller fraction
of those reverse the effect of the
original mutation. And damn it, those
are the ones that you see in the
recurrent cancers. And now there's no
point in treating that tumor with the
PARP inhibitor because it's BRCA pathway
is now restored. But hopefully there'll
be something. Exactly. You got to go to
the next step. Right. You guys are
talking about finding these Achilles
heels and the cancers, right? The cancer
cell is like living on the edge. It's
life on the edge. It's it's got this
Fouian bargain. It's got this activated
pathway, but something else is wrong.
And how are we going to do this for all
the
cancers? Well, just to think genome
style for a
moment. You could take a thousand
different cancer cell lines and inhibit
every one of the 20,000 genes in each of
the thousand cancer cell lines and make
a table that says which genes being
inhibited in which cell lines makes them
croak. and how does that relate to their
mutations? Those kind of experiments are
being done by young scientists today.
Those experiments are being done. What's
exhilarating is this kind of genome
style of I'm going to look at the
entirety of the thing. Thousands of cell
lines, all the genes being inhibited are
experiments within the grasp of small
collections of scientists. Right? So, we
should be optimistic that it isn't just
a hit or miss process of finding these
Achilles heels. What's great about
science is there's always a young
generation coming along who are saying,
"Ah, you olsters, you tell these stories
about, you know, this one or that one
and all. We're going to try to do it
all." Their favorite word is all. Their
favorite word is all. Comprehensive.
That gives one hope that that's going to
in fact lay out this map in a much more
systematic way.
in in your clinical work now, the
understanding of the of cancer genomes,
is it in any way improving the quality
of life of of your patients? So, one of
the things that I I would hope will come
out of this exciting work is that we're
going to go back to the drawing board
and pick drugs that have not only good
uh benefit to the patient, but less side
effects. And so, we've spent a lot of
time this evening talking about the
cancer genome from the perspective of,
you know, let's find what's wrong with
the cancer cells. Remember cancer cells
are living in a human body, right? And
so a lot of the genes work in context,
right? So even when you know what's
wrong with the cancer cells, you also
have to understand how the drugs would
affect the person that you're giving it
to. So when we're talking about
sequencing the genome and getting a
better understanding, we also need to
understand human being, human behavior.
This is where the challenge comes
because we also know, take for example,
when you have a BRCA1 mutation, we tell
you you're going to be at risk for
ovarian cancer. There's some women, the
minute you tell them they have a risk,
they want their ovaries out immediately.
And there's some women you're going to
have to hit them in the head that they
have a risk and they don't perceive that
risk. It's like, oh, I'm not going to
worry about it. Why is that? Right? So
there's also a lot of fundamental work
going on about the genetics of behavior.
We know that it's not every person who
smokes that becomes addicted to smoking
and then goes on and gets lung cancer.
So when we begin to think about
prevention, risk assessment, there's a
whole lot of work to do to understand
who's going to when they smoke become
addicted and then get lung cancer. Can
you imagine when we can predict that?
what we're going to be able to do to a
lot of college kids who pick up smoking,
right? And then get
addicted. What do you think about when
we begin to think about who is going to
get breast cancer, right? And now what
we have to offer is, you know, maybe
prophylactic mastctomy or we tell
everybody go and get a mass uh go and
get a mamogram. What if we could tell
people don't worry you'll never get
breast cancer. What would that look
like? Right? Do you foresee a world
where that's going to take? Absolutely.
Because that's part of genetic risk
assessment and then genetic with
lifestyle factor. You integrate all of
that. You might be able to say why are
we spending all that money getting you
to go get a mamogram every year. So I I
see a lot of possibilities from being
able to diagnose cancer early. There's
some uh uh people who are working on uh
what we call um circulating cancer uh
cells. So now we've treated a patient.
We think the cancer is gone, but we may
be able to take some blood, look at
circulating tumor cells, detect those
little cancer cells because we know
their gene signature, right? And then we
can attack them before they actually
become full-blown recurrence. So there's
a whole host of possibilities. The
challenge, as I see it, is that we're
still training people in parallel
worlds, right? The basic scientists are
in their labs. They're doing whole
genome everything and they're throwing
everything and they're getting the drugs
out, right? And I have my clinicians who
are trying to become the next, you know,
generation of oncologists. How do I get
them to understand the language that the
basic scientists are saying? And then
for the basic scientists to understand
human cancer and we have to cross
trainin, we have to begin to talk to one
another. When we do that, we can
accelerate the progress.
What are you seeing, Sid in in terms of
the the impact of the genome on on your
patients today?
You know, I work in I I treat uh liquid
cancers, cancers of the blood. And in
fact, the the irony of all of this is in
in fact in in the in cancers of the
blood. The genome has had impact years
and years before all of this. In you
know in 1980 in 1986
um hematological cancer people who treat
liquid cancers were using genomic
information although very crude genomic
information to treat cancers. So so in
in the world of blood cancers this
revolution has already been already full
fully embraced as it were um and it's
made a huge difference in the lives of
of of patients. The problem is that you
know myogynous leukemia one of the
disease that we treat is still
tremendously lethal. It is a lethal form
of cancer and we now know we have you
know Eric's group other groups have
sequenced multiple examples of that
genome. So we know that anatomy so we're
stuck in a very frustrating place in
which I could literally I mean I mean
imagine this I could go up to a patient
and we've done this actually we've just
done this done this last week. I could
go up to a patient and tell her happened
to be we did three women just by
coincidence. Um I could go and tell her
I can tell you exactly which genes are
abnormal in your cells but I cannot do a
damn thing about it. Um and and and
that's the frustration of a clinician
today working in the era of of genomics.
I can tell you exactly. I mean I know
that you know had I if I had a drug for
that gene I would use it. S what's
missing? We've got a generation of young
people coming along with the genomics
knowledge. They can find the mutations.
We got a generation beginning to grow
that's going to be able to work out this
physiology, how it's all wired. Making
drugs, is a serious business. We need to
bring a generation of young scientists
who are going to take this same genomic
attitude of how do we accelerate it? How
do we make drugs or drug-like candidates
quickly test them really efficiently? If
we don't accelerate that next part,
we're going to hit a bottleneck. I kind
of agree with you in the academy. We
don't take that seriously. Academically,
we look down on drug development and we
say, "Oh, that's a it's very industrial
thing, very applied. We don't really we
shouldn't." That is a highass
intellectual problem right now for this
decade. And every
successful contemporary cancer drug
which is targeted contemporary this is
not not 20 years ago has been developed
in combination of the academic
scientists the pharmaceutical industry
and now patient advocates every
successful has been involved in every so
so how do we we bridge that you you you
talk about the importance of building a
database of cancer sufferers of of
mapping out genomics um and then You
hear about this so-called valley of
death. So you discover the mutation, you
you discover what needs to be done.
Yeah. So So for them, the valley of
death is not the death of the patients.
Exactly. This is the death of drug
projects where you know what you need to
develop, but you can't get over that
hump where the pharmaceutical industry
is willing to take it and move forward.
How do how do you how do you do that?
What's the solution? So
look, acade academia has an obligation
here. We have to make drug development
as a process vastly more efficient. That
that's not what you should be asking
individual companies to do. Individual
companies should be making drugs and
doing commercial products. You didn't
ask the private sector to go sequence
the human genome etc. You didn't ask but
it wasn't it wasn't a great business
plan. It's not a business plan. We have
this great partnership between academia
that can do public good
and they can do what are called public
goods, things that can't be appropriated
and owned by anybody but are basic
knowledge and a fantastic commercial
sector that are able to do commercially
viable product projects. We've got to
pull our weight in the academic sector.
We have to have young students out there
and labs out there who are asking how do
we move much more rapid new kinds of
chemistry, new kinds of molecules, um
ways to optimize molecules, new kinds of
assays. I don't mean that academia
should become drug companies. It
shouldn't. But academia should take
seriously that
innovation, basic innovation, creative
new ideas, training a generation to
think this way is part of our job to
make a successful pipeline that
eventually gets to patients. And I think
it's happening. I think we're no longer
at the point where academics look down
entirely on drug development. I think
they're beginning to say this is
actually pretty important. And now
they're saying it's pretty interesting.
And now they're saying there are a lot
of creative ideas and we're beginning to
see efforts to fund it. I just can't go
forward proteomics and that kind I'm in
favor of it too. But I mean it's it's
that's what the mechanism. Yeah. No, I'm
not I'm not actually sure it is
proteomics. I think it's chemistry. I
think make drugs it's chemistry. We got
to do chemistry. And it was I I cannot
you know we we made I think we made
chemistry unsexy for a generation.
Unsexy. That's exactly right. sexier
than chemistry. It helps. I mean, you
know, it's all chemistry. Yeah. So,
well, you know, the thing is, you know,
when you ask how do things work, right?
When you uh look at the chemical
structure of proteins and young
scientists are excited about that and
then you sort of move things around. you
know, chemists didn't sort of surface
into uh uh a lot of biological systems
because they were somewhere and we spent
a lot of time on biology. So I think now
we need to bring everybody back together
to solve the problem. And I think you
know if we understand and annotate all
the genetic mutations and we can't
really good do good medicinal chemistry,
we're not going to get new drugs. We're
not going to get the targets that we
need.
Yeah, back to that woman. I can say, you
know, got a mutation in some gene. He
kit. I'm sorry. I can't do anything
about it. Yeah.
It's interesting when we talk to our
colleagues who are who are chemists or
structural biologists and they
understand exactly what we're doing. I
mean, it's not a mystery to them at all
and they create, let's say, um, a
protein that has the mutation in it that
we specify to them and they can tell us
often uh, what the consequences of that
change will be. They're very good at
that. if we could, but it's slow. It's
still very slow. And I can um I can feed
to my favorite um biohysical chemist
Rachel Clevit hundreds of these things.
And she says not more than one a week
and even then you've got to give me more
postocs. You you have to you have to
send your postocs to my lab to do this
work. it compared to the speed with
which we can generate the information in
genomics, the speed of generating
information in chemistry is still slow.
So if there were if there were a
technological revolution in chemistry
comparable to ours, it would be an
enormous benefit. And one thing we
shouldn't forget while we're sort of
looking for new drugs is there's
actually some old drugs that could be
better used now that we understand how
they work, right? So I think we have to
really figure out how to make old drugs
work better by using them on the
patients who need them because before we
thought all cancers let's just blast
them away but now we can go back and say
who really got benefit from that
platinum I mean testicular cancer is a
good example right it's it's a cancer
that even when it's vastly advanced
right Lance Armstrong with stage four uh
testicular cancer was still able to be
cured with
chemotherapy. Why did that happen?
Right? We can go back and you know
really study those really important uh
landmark uh uh clinical trials that gave
us cures for some cancers. Let's use
them better and disseminate them
and then develop new drugs. A question
for for for moving forward as as we
understand better the genetics the
genomics of cancer and we subdivide lung
cancer or breast cancer into many
different cancers. In fact, does it in a
sense exacerbate the problem of drug
development? So instead of a blockbuster
drug for treating all of lung cancer,
you're looking for for many more
targeted therapies that that that's
difficult to market. Yeah. How do you
how do you get beyond that so that so
that you're able to develop drugs that
are more focused that are are ensuring
you're not having those development
that's one thing the marketing is
another so imagine where every person in
the world with a BCR aable leukemia okay
I mean we travel we can be all connected
right the web connects all of us what if
every patient could go and look at what
their mutation was and what clinical
trial was was available for their
mutation and be part of a clinical trial
that's global right you will complete
studies in a month instead of me having
a study open only at the University of
Chicago and waiting for patients to come
right that's the kind of innovation we
have to bring to how we uh do clinical
trials and how we find patients who need
to uh participate in studies and this is
a very feasible
thing the world will look not so long
from now where every patient gets their
tumor sequenced and a little computer
program that gets run on it and says,
"Aha, mutations here, here, here. We
don't know what to do with you exactly,
but we do know the following 10 clinical
trials are open that are relevant to
this." And at least every what fraction
of patients are on clinical trials right
now in cancer. Some abysmal number, a
tiny fraction. Yeah, we ought to have
every patient have the option, it's an
option to contribute their data to a
common database, the option to be able
to know what clinical trials they might
go on because we're not going to solve
this without a partnership involving all
the patients. So, let me ask you why
patients aren't putting their uh data
into the public database. Privacy. Tell
me tell us about privacy. Well, look, I
Why is DNA so I think we may we may have
fetishized this this DNA privacy stuff.
I mean, it's it's out of control. Um, if
if I had cancer, I would want my genome
sequenced and I'd be glad to share it
with anybody. Now, right now, despite my
involvement in the human genome project,
I haven't gone and sequenced my genome
because, frankly, at the moment, it's
not terribly relevant to me. But the
minute I had something like cancer, I
would want that and I'd want to share it
because whatever would happen to me as a
cancer patient, the experience of being
able to contribute to something bigger
than myself would make it important and
meaningful to me. And I gotta say when
we talk about what harm might come to me
from knowledge of my genome compared to
the harm that's coming to me from the
cancer, you know, this is not really a
tradeoff. So this is why it's really
important to have public engagement in
this discussion, right? Because we have
put rules and regulations that actually
hinder the progress that we're looking
for. Because every time you want to get
data, share data, you have to go through
regulatory because we wanted to prohibit
discrimination. We wanted to prevent
patient privacy. So I think you know we
get it's a good thing. We want to give
people the option to have their privacy
protected. I'm worried right now that we
sometimes don't give patients who
knowledgeably know that they want to
share the ability to share. It's got to
be informed consent, but we ought to be
working hard to make sure that people
know they have both choices. Now, we're
we're we're down to the final wire here.
And and so I I uh I want to just end
with a question to to each of you that's
that's a little off off subject, but I I
think for the folks are here would be
very interesting and and this has to do
with what what drives you on a personal
level to to do the kind of work that you
do. Uh you know in in when I was in
training when I looked at people in
oncology it was it was kind of the work
of saints to go into that field because
it was before you knew it was the
prospects were were were very grim and
you were dealing with people w with with
uh often fatal diseases. So, you know,
I'll start with Eric and we we'll go
down the the line. I What drives you to
do the work you
do? The sense of infinite possibility
that comes from science. I love being
around young people.
I I live for being around great young
scientists because through their eyes,
you're never jaded. You realize that the
world has amazing possibilities. We're
going to get there. When I talk about it
might take three or four decades before
we get to this point about cancer, I
don't find that depressing at all
because there's an awful lot of future
ahead and if it takes only a couple
decades to get there or three or four,
wow, that's breathtaking compared to the
millennia that are going to come
afterwards. So what drives me is getting
up in the morning and being with bunches
of young scientists who see that the
world can be transformed and are willing
to put their life behind doing it.
There's nothing better as a job than to
work with people like that. And if it
takes a while and if it takes a life
that's that's just fine.
very clear. Well, JBS Haldane, a famous
geneticist of the early 20th century,
said that he felt that three different
factors drove scientists and that every
scientist could specify what his or her
balance of those factors were. So, let
me lay them out for you and and those of
you who are scientists, you know, think
about how this falls into place for you.
And I think over my life, mine has
changed a bit. The three factors in in
Haldane's uh paradigm are first
curiosity. Enough said. Second um doing
something useful for people generally
that altruism. And third the uh
opportunity to work in a community of
extraordinary people. And for me all of
those have played an enormous part. I
had no idea growing up what scientists
did. I had no idea what the life of a
scientist would be. It's only been in
the last few years that I've even been
able to say um publicly, let alone to
myself, I'm a scientist and I have a
life in science. And I couldn't ask for
anything more. And all three of those
parts of the braid have come together
for me.
And for me, you know, when you talk
about uh working in a community of
extraordinary people, my patients are
extraordinary.
It doesn't matter whether they're newly
diagnosed or they're dying of cancer.
They touch you in ways that make you
feel that you have a fulfilling life.
And then when I leave my clinic and I
can go back to the lab and tell the
scientists, the young scientists who are
in my lab that do you know that what
we're doing actually matters and this is
how if we did this, it could make a
difference for this patient. That's why
I get up every morning feeling like I'm
not working. I'm just having fun. It's
just a wonderful terrific job and and
life that I have taking care of patients
and being able to talk to scientists,
work with scientists and look for a a
better
future in oncology. Um I have a somewhat
unusual answer.
every once a year I spend um one month
in the wards um as part of the I mean
you know I I see patients one day a week
but I spend one full month in the
clinical wards u away from the
laboratory um first of all it humanizes
me um and every year I ask myself when I
go the first day of the wards I ask
myself why am I doing this um and I sit
down with the with usually the interns
and residents and the first time you see
the interns or residents who passing
through the cancer ward
they are shell shocked. Um cancer still
lives thankfully actually lives in the
outpatient world these days. It doesn't
live in the wards anymore. But it when
it does live in the wards it is a
particularly nasty variant. Usually
these are people who are going through
complications of chemotherapy. These are
people who have failed chemotherapies.
They're coming back for second round,
third rounds, etc. It's a depressing
place. Um, and I I sit down at rounds
the first day and I say to them, in
1947, if you were in Boston, um, and you
happened to be the internal resident
taking care of a child with acute
lymphablastic leukemia, you could be
sure that 100% of your patients would
die in the matter in a matter of six,
six days, 7 days, 10 days, 2 weeks, four
weeks. 100% of the patients. If you then
came back to that same ward in
1957, you would find that the numbers
had decreased to 50%. If you came back
to the same ward in 1977, it would be
down to 10%. By 1990s, it would be down
to 10 or you know 10 15% uh down range.
And here's what's here's what the kicker
for me is that and I tell the myself
this actually I'm telling myself this.
You won't know if you if if the woman
with malignant metastic melanoma is
going to be part of that 15% in 10 years
from now or if if if she's not going to
be. And amazingly enough, it's that
uncertainty that will drive you. It
drives me. You won't know. You cannot
tell. But imagine that moment of time. I
mean, it should send it should send a
shiver up everyone. If if it doesn't
send a shiver up your spine, you're in
the wrong profession. that that that the
that 100% of these children would be
dead and in 10 years time because of
serial iterative advances 90% of those
children were being cured are being
cured and 80 90% of these children are
being cured and imagine being able to do
that for melanoma. Imagine being able to
do that for acute myogynous leukemia.
Imagine being able to do that with
metastatic heru positive breast cancer,
triple negative breast cancer. You know,
um that uncertainty will drive us in
places that we've never been before. And
I think it's something very profound
about medicine.
Well, I I we've we've reached the end of
our evening. I I want to thank our panel
for a a tremendous conversation.
I I hope you feel as as I do, inspired
by by what they're sharing, optimistic
about the future of of of cancer
treatment, hopefully inspiring some of
you to pursue careers uh in this avenue,
and I encourage you to attend more of
the World Science Festival. Uh and thank
you very much for for being here
tonight. Thank you. Thank you for your
time.